Add memory manager moves to beta feature blog post 1.22 (#28958)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2021-08-09-memory-manager-moves-to-beta.md

---
layout: blog

> title: "Kubernetes Memory manager moves to beta"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Kubernetes Memory Manager moves to beta"
```

date: 2021-08-09
slug: kubernetes-1-22-feature-memory-manager-moves-to-beta
---

**Authors:** Artyom Lukianov (Red Hat), Cezary Zukowski (Samsung)

# Memory manager moves to beta

The blog post describes the internals of the **Memory manager**, a beta feature of Kubernetes 1.22. The **Memory Manager** is a component in the **kubelet** ecosystem proposed to enable the feature of guaranteed memory (and hugepages) allocation for pods in the [Guaranteed QoS class](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/quality-service-pod/#qos-classes).

This blog post covers:

1. Why do you need it?
2. The internal details of how the **MemoryManager** works
3. Current limitations of the **MemoryManager**

> 4. Future work for the **MemoryManager**

Reviewer: Consider linking each of these to the headings within the article.

Author: Done!

## Why do you need it?

> To get the best performance and latency for the workload container, container CPUs, PCI devices, and memory should be aligned to the same NUMA node. The kubelet already provides a set of managers to align CPUs and PCI devices, but you did not have a way to align memory. By default, the kernel will try to allocate the memory from the same NUMA node where container CPUs are placed, but it can not guarantee it.

Reviewer: How about:
```suggestion
Some Kubernetes workloads run on nodes with
[non-uniform memory access](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-uniform_memory_access) (NUMA).
If you have NUMA nodes in your cluster, you'll know about the potential for extra latency when
compute resources need to access memory that's on the same zone but a different NUMA
locality.

To get the best performance and latency for your workload, container CPUs,
peripheral devices, and memory should all be aligned to the same NUMA
locality.
Before Kubernetes v1.22, the kubelet already provided a set of managers to
align CPUs and PCI devices, but you did not have a way to align memory.
The Linux kernel was able to make best-effort attempts to allocate 
memory for tasks from the same NUMA node where the container is
executing are placed, but without any guarantee about that placement.
```
?

Reviewer: Ah, my mistake. Actually “same zone” should say “same NUMA system” (I don't want to write _node_, as in the Kubernetes meaning, as that is liable to be confused with the Linux NUMA term “node”).
And “NUMA locality” could be changed to “NUMA cell” if you think that'd be better understood.

Reviewer 2: I think we can use `machine` for the cluster node, WDT? I am just less familiar with the zone usage and for me, it looks like the data center terminology.

## How does it work?

The memory manager is doing two main things:
- provides the topology hint to the **Topology Manager**
- allocates the memory for containers and updates the state

The overall sequence of the Memory Manager under the Kubelet

> ![MemoryManagerDiagram
> ](/images/blog/2021-08-09-memory-manager-moves-to-beta/MemoryManagerDiagram.svg "MemoryManagerDiagram")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Kubernetes Memory Manager on a node](/images/blog/2021-08-09-memory-manager-moves-to-beta/MemoryManagerDiagram.svg)
```

During the Admission phase:

> 1. During the admission, the **Kubelet** calling the **TopologyManager** `Admit()` method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. When first handling a new pod, the kubelet calls the TopologyManager's `Admit()` method.
```

2. The **TopologyManager** is calling `GetTopologyHints()` for every hint provider including the **MemoryManager**.
3. The **MemoryManager** calculates all possible NUMA nodes combinations for every container inside the pod and returns hints to the **TopologyManager**.
4. The **TopologyManager** calls to `Allocate()` for every hint provider including the **MemoryManager**.

> 5. The **MemoryManager** allocates the memory under the state according to the hint that the **TopologyManager** chose.

Reviewer: We'd usually write this without any bold text. Also, writing “Memory Manager” and “Topology Manager” with a space.

> During the creation phase:
> 
> 1. The **Kubelet** calls `PreCreateContainer()`.
> 2. The **MemoryManager** get the NUMA nodes where it allocated the memory for the container and returns it to **Kubelet**.
> 3. The **Kubelet** creates the container via CRI with the spec updated according to the **MemoryManager** information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During Pod creation:

1. The kubelet calls `PreCreateContainer()`.
2. For each container, the Memory Manager looks the NUMA nodes where it allocated the
   memory for the container and then returns that information to the kubelet.
3. The kubelet creates the container, via CRI, using a container specification
   that incorporates information from the Memory Manager information.
```

### Let's talk about the configuration

> By default, the **MemoryManager** runs with the `None` policy, meaning it will just relax and will not do anything. To enable the **MemoryManager**, you should provide two **Kubelet** flags:

Reviewer: How about:
```suggestion
By default, the Memory Manager runs with the `None` policy, meaning it will just
relax and not do anything. To make use of the Memory Manager, you should set
two command line options for the kubelet:
```
Maybe also mention [Set Kubelet parameters via a config file](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/kubelet-config-file/) - I think that's the recommended way to configure kubelets.

- `--memory-manager-policy=Static`
- `--reserved-memory="<numaNodeID>:<resourceName>=<quantity>"`

> It is clear what value you should set for the `--memory-manager-policy` parameter. But it is not 100% clear how you should configure the `--reserved-memory` parameter. To configure it correctly, you should follow two main rules:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The value for `--memory-manager-policy` is straighforward: `Static`. Deciding what to specify for `--reserved-memory` takes more thought. To configure it correctly, you should follow two main rules:
```
?

- The amount of reserved memory for the `memory` resource must be greater than zero.

> - The amount of reserved memory for the resource type must be equal to [NodeAllocatable](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/reserve-compute-resources/) (`kube-reserved + system-reserved + eviction-hard`) for the resource. You can read more about
> 
> ![ReservedMemory
> ](/images/blog/2021-08-09-memory-manager-moves-to-beta/ReservedMemory.svg "ReservedMemory")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The amount of reserved memory for the resource type must be equal
  to [NodeAllocatable](/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/reserve-compute-resources/#node-allocatable)
  (`kube-reserved + system-reserved + eviction-hard`) for the resource.
  You can read more about memory reservations in
  [Reserve Compute Resources for System Daemons](/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/reserve-compute-resources/).

![Reserved memory
](/images/blog/2021-08-09-memory-manager-moves-to-beta/ReservedMemory.svg)
```

## Current limitations

The 1.22 release and promotion to beta brings along enhancements and fixes, but the **MemoryManager** still has several limitations.

### Single vs Cross NUMA node allocation

The NUMA node can not have both single and cross NUMA node allocations. When the container memory is pinned to two or more NUMA nodes, we can not know from which NUMA node the container will consume the memory.

![SingleCrossNUMAAllocation

> ](/images/blog/2021-08-09-memory-manager-moves-to-beta/SingleCrossNUMAAllocation.svg "SingleCrossNUMAAllocation")

Reviewer: We should fix the alt attribute here (for accessibility).

> ](/images/blog/2021-08-09-memory-manager-moves-to-beta/SingleCrossNUMAAllocation.svg "SingleCrossNUMAAllocation")

Reviewer 2: done

1. The `container1` started on the NUMA node 0 and requests *5Gi* of the memory but currently is consuming only *3Gi* of the memory.
2. For container2 the memory request is 10Gi, and no single NUMA node can satisfy it.
3. The `container2` consumes *3.5Gi* of the memory from the NUMA node 0, but once the `container1` will require more memory, it will not have it, and the kernel will kill one of the containers with the **OOM** error.

To prevent such issues, the **MemoryManager** will fail the admission of the `container2` until the machine has two NUMA nodes without a single NUMA node allocation.

> ### Works only for guaranteed pods

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Works only for Guaranteed pods
```

The **MemoryManager** can not guarantee memory allocation for burstable pods, also when the burstable pod has specified equal memory limit and request.

> Let's assume you have two burstable pods, `pod1` has containers with equal memory request and limits, and `pod2` has containers only with the memory request. We want to guarantee memory allocation for the `pod1`. Both pods have the same **OOM** score, so once the kernel will not have enough memory, it can kill `pod1`.

Reviewer: I'd write:
```suggestion
Let's assume you have two Burstable pods: `pod1` has containers with
equal memory request and limits, and `pod2` has containers only with a
memory request set. You want to guarantee memory allocation for the `pod1`.
To the Linux kernel, processes in either pod have the same *OOM score*, 
o once the kernel finds that it does not have enough memory, it can kill 
processes that belong to pod `pod1`.
```

### Memory fragmentation

> The sequence of containers that start and stop can fragment the memory on NUMA nodes. Currently, we do not have any components under the kubelet that can balance pods and defragment memory back.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The sequence of Pods and containers that start and stop can fragment the memory
on NUMA nodes.
The alpha implementation of the Memory Manager does not have any mechanism 
to can balance pods and defragment memory back.
```

Reviewer 2: done

## Future work for the **MemoryManager**

> We do not want to stop with the current state of the **MemoryManager** and looking for places for improvements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We do not want to stop with the current state of the Memory Manager and are looking to
make improvements, including in the following areas.
```
?

Reviewer 2: done

### Make the MemoryManager allocation algorithm smarter

> The current algorithm ignores distances between NUMA nodes during the calculation of the allocation. We can get better performance when the **MemoryManager** will use the closest NUMA nodes for cross NUMA node allocation.

Reviewer: I'd write
```suggestion
The current algorithm ignores distances between NUMA nodes during the
calculation of the allocation. If same-node placement isn't available, we can still
provide better performance compared to the current implementation, by changing the
Memory Manager to prefer the closest NUMA nodes for cross-node allocation.
```

Reviewer 2: done

### Reduce the number of admission errors

The default Kubernetes scheduler is not aware of the node's NUMA topology, and it can be a reason for many admission errors during the pod start.

> A [KEP]([https://https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/2787) for this work is currently under review, and a prototype is underway to get this feature implemented very soon.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We're hoping to add a KEP (Kubernetes Enhancement Proposal) to cover
improvements in this area. Follow
[Topology aware scheduler plugin in kube-scheduler](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/2044)
to see how this idea progresses.
```

Reviewer 2: done

---
layout: blog
title: "Kubernetes Memory Manager moves to beta"
date: 2021-08-09
slug: kubernetes-1-22-feature-memory-manager-moves-to-beta
---

**Authors:** Artyom Lukianov (Red Hat), Cezary Zukowski (Samsung)

> # Memory manager moves to beta

Reviewer: Omit this heading - the Hugo theme we use adds a heading at `<h1>` level automatically, based on the page title.

Reviewer 2: done

calculation of the allocation. If same-node placement isn't available, we can still
provide better performance compared to the current implementation, by changing the
Memory Manager to prefer the closest NUMA nodes for cross-node allocation.

### Reduce the number of admission errors

The default Kubernetes scheduler is not aware of the node's NUMA topology, and it can be a reason for many admission errors during the pod start.
We're hoping to add a KEP (Kubernetes Enhancement Proposal) to cover improvements in this area. 
Follow [Topology aware scheduler plugin in kube-scheduler](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/2044) to see how this idea progresses.

## Conclusion
With the promotion of the Memory Manager to beta in 1.22, we encourage everyone to give it a try and look forward to any feedback you may have. While there are still several limitations, we have a set of enhancements planned to address them and look forward to providing you with many new features in upcoming releases.
If you have ideas for additional enhancements or a desire for certain features, please let us know. The team is always open to suggestions to enhance and improve the Memory Manager.

> We hope you have found this blog informative and helpful! Let us know if you have any questions or comments.

Reviewer: How should readers get in contact?

Reviewer 2: Added the possible way to contact us.

Memory Manager to prefer the closest NUMA nodes for cross-node allocation.

### Reduce the number of admission errors

The default Kubernetes scheduler is not aware of the node's NUMA topology, and it can be a reason for many admission errors during the pod start.
We're hoping to add a KEP (Kubernetes Enhancement Proposal) to cover improvements in this area. 
Follow [Topology aware scheduler plugin in kube-scheduler](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/2044) to see how this idea progresses.

## Conclusion
With the promotion of the Memory Manager to beta in 1.22, we encourage everyone to give it a try and look forward to any feedback you may have. While there are still several limitations, we have a set of enhancements planned to address them and look forward to providing you with many new features in upcoming releases.
If you have ideas for additional enhancements or a desire for certain features, please let us know. The team is always open to suggestions to enhance and improve the Memory Manager.
We hope you have found this blog informative and helpful! Let us know if you have any questions or comments.

You can contact us via:

> - Slack #sig-node channel in [kubernetes.slack.com](http://kubernetes.slack.com)

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
- The Kubernetes [#sig-node ](https://kubernetes.slack.com/messages/sig-node)
  channel in Slack (visit https://slack.k8s.io/ for an invitation if you need one)
```

Reviewer 2: done

> - Mailing List: [https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/kubernetes-sig-node](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/kubernetes-sig-node)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The SIG Node mailing list, [kubernetes-sig-node@googlegroups.com](https://groups.google.com/g/kubernetes-sig-node)
```
?

Reviewer 2: done
